---
alt_url: /archives/243
kind: article
author: Vincent Driessen
created_at: 2009-06-22
title: NSManagedObjectContext extensions
---
NSManagedObjectContext extensions

The Core Data framework rules, and its API is really really powerful. But really, why does the Core Data API require us to write so much boilerplate code? Simple things need to be simple.

Why is the deletion of a managed object from the NSManagedObjectContext so easy:

<pre><code class="language-objc">[context deleteObject:someObject];</code></pre>

Compared to its creation:

<pre><code class="language-objc">[NSEntityDescription insertNewObjectForEntityForName:@"someObjectClassName"
                              inManagedObjectContext:context];</code></pre>

h3. Extending NSManagedObjectContext

Add the following category on NSManagedObjectContext to all of your Core Data projects and your pains will be history.

<pre><code class="language-objc">@implementation NSManagedObjectContext (NSManagedObjectContextConvenienceMethods)

- (id)newObject:(Class)entity {
    return [NSEntityDescription insertNewObjectForEntityForName:[entity description]
                                         inManagedObjectContext:self];
}

@end</code></pre>

Now, a call to create a new object is as easy as deleting it.

<pre><code class="language-objc">[context newObject:[someEntity class]];</code></pre>

h3. Further enhancements of NSManagedObject

Matt Gallagher has written an "excellent article":http://cocoawithlove.com/2008/03/core-data-one-line-fetch.html about how to further enhance NSManagedObject for adding simple, one-line fetch support. Be sure to check it out.