---
alt_url: /archives/492
kind: article
author: Vincent Driessen
created_at: 2010-03-04
title: An upgrade of gitflow
---
Last week, I silently tagged "gitflow 0.2":http://github.com/nvie/gitflow/tree/0.2. The most important changes since 0.1 are:

* Order of arguments changed to have a more "gitish" subcommand structure. For example, you now say:

<pre><code>git flow feature start myfeature</code></pre>

* Better initializer. @git flow init@ now prompts interactively to set up a gitflow enabled repo.
* Added a command to list all feature/release/hotfix/support branches, e.g.:

<pre><code>git flow feature list</code></pre>

* Made all merge/rebase operations failsafe, providing a non-destructive workflow in case of merge conflicts.
* Easy diff'ing of all changes on a specific (or the current) feature branch:

<pre><code>git flow feature diff [feature]</code></pre>

* Add support for feature branch rebasing:

<pre><code>git flow feature rebase</code></pre>

* Some subactions now take name prefixes as their arguments, for convenience. For example, if you have feature branches called "experimental", "refactoring" and "feature-X", you could say:

<pre><code>git flow feature finish ref</code></pre>

And gitflow will know you mean the "refactoring" feature branch.

These actions are: @finish@, @diff@ and @rebase@.

* Much better overall sanity checking.
* Better portability (POSIX compliant code)
* Better (more portable) flag parsing using Kate Ward's "shFlags":http://code.google.com/p/shflags/.
* Improved installer. To install @git flow@ as a first-class Git subcommand, simply type:

<pre><code>sudo make install</code></pre>

* Major and minor bug fixes.

That's all for now.