---
published: true
kind: article
author: Vincent Driessen
created_at: 2010-03-03
updated_at: 2010-03-03
title: Unexpected side effects in Python classes
alt_url: /archives/470
disqus_id: '470 http://nvie.com/?p=470'
---
Today, I lost several hours while debugging a language implementation detail
in Python that I did not know of and that really feels counterintuitive and
dangerous to me.

I was writing unit tests for a Python class that I was implementing, when one
of the tests that had repeatedly been passing suddenly failed. Moreover, the
failing test case was really for testing some completely unrelated piece of
functionaly. This simply could not be broken!

After at least an hour of scrutinizing the code, I was able to distill the
real problem, which I think is summarized here in the most compact way:

<pre><code class="language-python">
class Foo:
  x = {}
  
  def __init__(self, id):
    self.x[id] = id

f1 = Foo(5)
print f1.x     # {5:5}, as expected
f2 = Foo(6)
print f2.x     # {5:5,6:6} ?!
</code></pre>

Creating a simple @Foo@ instance twice exposes the ugly side effect: the
second @Foo@ instance has an already initialized @x@ instance variable when
the constructor enters! Yuck! Moreover, now, too:

<pre><code class="language-python">
print f1.x     # {5:5,6:6}, too!
</code></pre>

Apparently, the @x@ "instance variable" is a shared object, much like a global
or class variable.

To be even more confusing, this doesn't seem to hold for basic data types. For
example, change the dictionary to an integer, and the example behaves as
expected:

<pre><code class="language-python">
class Foo:
  x = 3

  def __init__(self, id):
    self.x = id

f1 = Foo(5)
print f1.x     # 5, as expected
f2 = Foo(6)
print f2.x     # 6, as expected
</code></pre>

h2. The behaviour demystified

The real confusion here is that I was thinking that I was creating "instance
variables", like you would in C++ or Java. As the "Python
documentation":http://docs.python.org/tutorial/classes.html#instance-objects
mentions:

bq. "data attributes correspond to [...] to data members in C++. Data
attributes need not be declared; like local variables, they spring into
existence when they are first assigned to."

Yes, I knew that, but nonetheless my real-world class is much bigger than @Foo@
and I wanted an explicit overview on which instance variables are in this
class. Hence the data member.

However, this is not how the Python interpreter processes Python code. In fact,
upon class definition, the statement @x = {}@ is executed within the scope of
the newly defined class. To prove this:

<pre><code class="language-python">
class Bar:
  x = {}

print Bar.x     # {}
</code></pre>

Even without a constructor or instance variable, we can access the data member
@x@. Of course. Now this suddenly seems obvious.

But what about our instance variables? Apparently, when we create a new
instance of @Bar@, the instance data member @x@ is initially _pointing to the
same object_ as the class data member @x@. The following example proves this:

<pre><code class="language-python">
class Foo:
  x = {}
  
  def __init__(self, id):
    self.x = { id: id }

f1 = Foo(5)
print f1.x     # { 5:5 }, as expected
f2 = Foo(6)
print f2.x     # { 6:6 }, as expected
print Foo.x    # {}, didn't intend this!
</code></pre>

This example also demonstrates the subtlety of the accidentally discovered
side-effect. Remember how we were changing the dictionary in our initial
example? @self.x[id] = id@<br />
The instance data member was pointing to the same object as the class data
member. By updating the dictionary, the single dictionary object was changed,
causing unwanted side effects in other class instances.

In the listing above, @x@ is forced to point to a new dictionary by the
assignment @self.x = { id:id }@. In other words, @x@ points to a new object!
This also perfectly explains why the integer example worked—it's the same kind
of assignment.

h2. Conclusion

To summarize, I learned some important lessons today:

* All the time, I have been creating class data members in all my classes,
  without knowing this.
* I initialized those members to default values, effectively creating useless
  objects that are never accessed and just claiming memory.
* Although it can be explained, a seemingly innocent statement like @x = {}@
  can have very ugly side effects. Be warned!
* Never underestimate the power of unit tests. It is absolutely worth the
  investment.
